# Data Clean Rooms

Bosko Milekic, the Chief Product of Office and Co-founder of Optable joins us today. Optable is a data collaboration platform for the media and advertising industry. They enable advertisers and publishers to collaborate on the basis of their first-party data. Bosko discusses how their clean room platform can enable seamless data collaboration between parties.

Bosko started by discussing how data is shared without clean rooms and how clean rooms help to make collaboration more secure. He gave practical applications where clean rooms ensure the shared data is used for the agreed-upon purpose. Cryptography methods such as multi-party compute are also used to encrypt and decrypt the data without sharing private data. Bosko also talked about the use of third parties as a middleman between the collaborative parties.

Bosko discussed other scenarios where the use of clean rooms is imperative. He spoke about measures that guarantee that personal data are not shared in the pipeline. He also explained how programmers can get data in and out of the data clean rooms.

Bosko had his thoughts on the adoption of the clean room technology and what the future looks like. He discussed the problem with interoperability and the efforts Optable is making to make interoperability seamless. Bosko also explained how either publisher or advertiser can bring their own data to execute their offering on Optable. He also discussed the feedback from users using clean rooms and the metrics to evaluate its success. You can learn more on [optable.co](https://www.optable.co/), or email Bosko directly at [bosko@optable.co](mailto:bosko@optable.co). 