# Learning Digital Fabrication Remotely
Today, we are joined by Jennifer Jacobs and Nadya Peek. Jennifer is an Assistant Professor of Media Arts and Technology at the University of California while Nadya is an Assistant Professor in the Department of Human Centered Design, at the University of Washington. They both run research labs that focus on human creativity and technology. Jennifer and Nadia join us to talk about digital fabrication and how they teach the course remotely to students.

Jennifer started off by explaining what digital fabrication is about. Technologies such as 3D printers, laser cutters, computer-controlled cutting machines, etc can all be classified as digital fabrication. Nadya, on the other hand, spoke broadly about the premise upon which digital fabrication was found and the key problem it solves. 

Going forward, they both discussed the prospect for this technology to scale in the coming years. Well, it begins with having a strong foundation in some requisite skills. They both spoke about the academic roadmap to delving into the digital fabrication space. Nadya specifically listed some of the software tools to master to thrive in the field. 

They also touched on the possibility of learning digital fabrication without requiring physical equipment. COVID-19 has definitely had an impact on having to teach students in in-person classes and getting hands-on experience with fabrication equipment. Even though it had its downside, they discussed how they managed to teach the experimentation-heavy course post-COVID. They also talked about the challenges involved in having students learn the course online. 

In addition, they discussed the strategies they adopted to evaluate how effective the new style of learning has been over the years. One of such strategies involved engaging their colleagues in other Universities and contrasting the effect of their teaching style with theirs. To wrap up, they shared ideas on how other instructors can exploit remote learning in these times. You can catch up with Jennifer’s work from her [lab’s website](https://ecl.mat.ucsb.edu/). Nadya’s related works can be found on [her own lab’s website](https://depts.washington.edu/machines/). Find the lab on Twitter [@machine_agency](https://twitter.com/Machine_Agency).
