# Remote Software Development
In this episode, we speak with Danae Ford, a Senior Researcher at Microsoft Research and an Affiliate Assistant Professor at the University of Washington. Her study is focused on the intersection of software engineering and human-computer interaction (HCI). Danae joins us today to speak about her latest surveys on remote work, social communities, and human-computer interaction.

She started by outlining the key research questions that HCI researchers focus on - primarily how software engineers use technological systems. Some of the systems she spoke about include StackOverflow and GitHub. 

Speaking of StackOverflow, Danae revealed some of the shocking findings from her survey on gender representation on the platform. Danae also discussed the approaches that can be used to solve marginalization on online forums. That would first involve identifying and mapping out a list of barriers that the marginalized group is facing. She further explained actionable steps that can be done to improve community engagement across the board. 

Danae then spoke about her new study on the [impact COVID-19 pandemic on remote work](https://scholar.google.com/citations?view_op=view_citation&hl=en&user=ohKNHlUAAAAJ&citation_for_view=ohKNHlUAAAAJ:e5wmG9Sq2KIC). The productivity of workers, before and after remote work became widespread, was one of the tracked indicators. Communication was another. She disclosed her findings with respect to these two metrics. Going forward, she extensively spoke about practical recommendations for a more productive remote work system. 

Danae also touched on the projections for the future - whether remote work is here to stay or if we are going to massively get back to in-office activities. In closing, the Senior Researcher gave a piece of advice to employers for better organization work. She also spoke about her new survey: [”How Was Your Weekend?” Software Development Teams Working From Home During COVID-19](https://scholar.google.com/citations?view_op=view_citation&hl=en&user=ohKNHlUAAAAJ&citation_for_view=ohKNHlUAAAAJ:iH-uZ7U-co4C). Interestingly, the results from the new survey corroborated the findings from the earlier one. 

Danae is also looking at research works around trust-building in online communities and how the next generation of developers would approach online social spaces. You can catch up on all of her works on her [website](https://denaeford.me/) or her [Google Scholar page](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=ohKNHlUAAAAJ&hl=en). A large chunk of her research is posted on the [Microsoft research blog](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/blog/).
